•JX
The Flat-out Truth:
Eaxth Orbits? Moon Landings?
A Fraud! Says This Prophet
The idea of a spinning globe is only
a conspiracy of error that Moses,
Columbus, and FDR all fought...
by Robert J. Schadewald
“ T h e f a c t s a r e s i m p l e ,”
says Charles K. Johnson,
president of the International
Flat Earth Reseilrch Society.
“The earth is flat.”
As you stand in his front yard, it
is hard to argue the point. From
among the Joshua trees, creosote
bushes, and tumbleweeds surrounding his southern California hillside
home, you have a spectacular view
of the Mojave Desert. It looks as
flat as a pool table. Nearly 20 miles
to the west lies the small city of
Lancaster; you can sec right over it.
Beyond Lancaster, 20 more miles as
the cueball rolls, the Tehachepi
Mountains rise up from the desert
floor. Los Angeles is not far to the
south.
N ear L an caster, you sec the
Rockwell International plant where
the Space Shuttle was built. To the
north, beyond the next hill, lies Edwards A ir Force Base, where the
Shuttle was tested. There, also, the
Shuttle will land when it returns
from orbiting the earth. (At least,
that’s NASA’s story.)
“You can’t orbit a flat earth,”
says M r. Johnson. “ T he Space
Shuttle is a joke—and a very ludicrous joke.”
His soft voice carries conviction,
for Charles Johnson is on the level.
He believes that the main purpose
of the space program is to prop up a
dying m yth— the m yth that the
earth is a globe.
“Nobody knows anything about
the true shape of the world,” he
contends. “The known, inhabited
world is flat. Just as a guess. I’d say
that the dome of heaven is about
4,000 miles away, and the stars are
Robert Schadewald, who reported for Science Digest readers on Im m anuel Velikoysky's last interview (March 1980), writes
frequently about controversial figures and
theories. In September 1979 he wrote on the
ballistics o f baseball, where a globe-shaped
object is the center o f attention. He has been
held ineligible for membership in thi International Flat Earth Research Siociely because o f
his spherical tendencies.
about as far as San Francisco is
from Boston.”
As shown in a map published by
Johnson, the known world is as circular and as flat as a phonograph
record. The North Pole is at the
center. At the outer edge lies the
southern ice, reputed to be a wall
150 feet high; no one has ever
crossed it, and therefore what lies
beyond is unknown.
The sun and moon, in the Johnson version, are only about 32 miles
in diameter. They circle above the
earth in the vicinity of the equator,
and their apparent rising and setting are tricks of perspective, like
railroad tracks that appear to meet
in the distance. The moon shines by
its own light and is not eclipsed by
the earth. Rather, lunar eclipses are
caused by an unseen dark body occasionally passing in front of the
moon.
A Biblical Basis
Jo h n so n ’s beliefs are firm ly
grounded in the Bible. Many verses
of the Old Testament imply that the
earth is flat, but there’s more to it
than that. According to the New
Testament, Jesus ascended up into
heaven.
“The whole point of the Copemican theory is to get rid of Jesus by
saying there is no up and no down,”
declares Johnson. “The spinning
ball thing just makes the whole Bible a big joke.”
Not the Bible but Johnson’s own
common sense allowed him to see
through the globe myth while he
was still in grade school. He contends that sensible people all over
the world, not just Bible believers.
Both Old and New
Testaments contain support
for his theories, declares
this flat-earth proponent,
who also refutes common
beliefs about sun, moon,
and space exploration, and
debunks the Shuttle.
realize that the earth really is flat.
“Wherever you find people with
a great reservoir of common sense,”
he says, “they don’t believe idiotic
things such as the earth spinning
around the sun. Reasonable, intelligent people have always recognized
that the earth is flat.”
He pauses for a sip of coffee, his
eyes sparkling with animation. At
56, Charles Johnson is a bearded,
distinguished-looking m an who
drinks cofTee seemingly by the gallon. He chain-smokes, hand-rolling
cigarettes so skillfully that they
seem factory made. Unlike the stereotypical prophet, he has a wry
sense of hum or and a booming
laugh. Fond of plays on words, he
consistently pronounces Nicolaus
Koppemigk’s Latinized surname as
“co-pernicious.”
The Flat Earth Society’s presidency descended upon C harles
Johnson in accord with the last
wishes of its founder, Samuel Shenton, an Englishman who died in
1971. The society, which will round
out a quarter-century next year, is a
spiritual inheritor of the Universal
Zetetic Society, which flourished in
England in the last century.
Under Johnson’s full-time presidency, the society’s paid-uo mem-
FLAT EARTH—Continued
bership has grown from a few persons to a few hundred. Membership
is open to anyone who is regarded
as sincerely seeking the truth; prospective members must sign a statement agreeing never to defame the
society. Part of the $10 annual dues
pays for a subscription to the Flat
Earth News, a marvelously outspoken four-page tabloid quarterly
with an editorial style reminiscent
of 19th-century rural journalism.
2,000 Letters a Year
Johnson’s ofTice is barely controlled chaos. Books, papers, and
files are everywhere; his desk is covered with correspondence. The flow
of letters, still increasing, now runs
around 2,000 a year, or a half-dozen every day. Some are properly addressed (Box 2533, Lancaster, CA
93534), but he receives any mail
that reaches Lancaster with “flatearth” on it. And such letters sometimes come from the far edges of
the w orld (an expression which
Johnson and his membership accept
quite literally). Rummaging in a
box on the floor, Johnson produces
inquiries from Saudi Arabia, Iran,
India.
“Everybody who writes gets an
answer,” he reports. “An application or whatever is called for. We
serve o u r purpose in keeping it
alive. Whosoever asks, receives."
The “we” includes his wife, M arjory, who is a native of Australia.
The Johnsons m et by chance in
1959, when they both went into a
San Francisco store to buy the same
re co rd . A ck er B ilk ’s h a u n tin g
“Stranger on the Shore.” They discovered that they had more in com60 SCI/D)-,)ULY I960
nion than their tastes in music.
They’re both vegetarians, for one
thing, but the overriding interest is
geography.
"Marjory has always known that
the earth is flat, too,” says Charles
Johnson. “As far as she knew, everybody in Australia knew it. She
was rather shocked when she arrived here and found people speaking of Australia as being ‘down under.’ It really offended her. She
would get in quite heated arguments with people who seemed to
accuse her of coming from down
under the world.” Ultimately, Marjory Johnson swore in an afiidavit
that she had never hung by her feet
in Australia.
Flat Lakes, Too
As secretary of the Flat Earth
Society, she assists in running it,
and writes a regular column in the
News. She has also helped her husband perform experiments to determine the earth’s shape. If it is a
sphere, the surface of a large body
of water must be curved. The Johnsons have checked the surfaces of
Lake Tahoe and the Salton Sea (a
shallow salt lake in southern California near the Mexican border)
without detecting any curvature.
Their home is a half-mile from
the nearest neighbor. Friends drop
by now and then, but their primary
companions are a half-dozen dogs,
several cats, a flock of chickens,
and a myriad of sparrows roosting
in a Joshua tree just outside the
door. No electric-power line runs to
the house, for which water must be
carried up the hill. The physical
isolation is the ultimate in privacy—but another kind of isolation
proves to be less desirable.
“We’re two witnesses against the
whole w orld,” observes Charles
Johnson. “We’ve chosen that path,
but it isolates us from everyone.
We’re not complaining; it has to be.
But it does kind of get to you sometimes.”
In spite of the loneliness and the
frustrations, they press on. Charles
Johnson claims that most of the
people who shaped our m odern
world were flat-earthers, and some
of them didn’t have it easy, either.
Famous Flat-Earthers
You w eren’t aware that fla tearthers have played an important
part in history? Well, conventional
histories don’t make that clear. But
inasmuch as revisionist history is in
vogue, Charles Johnson should be
recognized as one of the leading
practitioners.
“Moses was a flat-earther,” he
reveals. “The Flat Earth Society
was founded in 1492 B.C., when
Moses led the children of Israel out
of Egypt and gave them the Ten
Commandments at Mount Sinai.”
Conventional biblical chronology
dates the Ten Commandments to
1491 B.C., but it may be imprecise.
Perhaps Johnson prefers 1492 for
the symmetry. It was, after all, in
1492 A.D. that another famous flatearther made history.
Have you heard the story about
C olum bus’s problem s w ith his
crew? As some tell it, the crew
nearly mutinied because they regarded the earth as flat, and feared
they might sail off its edge.
“It was exactly the reverse,” exCharles Johnson: "Moses. Columbus.
George Washington, and FDR were all
flat-earthers."
plains Johnson. “There was a dispute out on the ship, but it was because Columbus was a flat-earther.
The others believed the earth to be
a ball, and thoy just knew that they
were falling over the edge and
couldn’t get back. Columbus had to
put them in irons and beat them until he convinced them they weren’t
going over any curve, and they
could return. He finally calmed
them down.”
Johnson believes that the ball
business—though it goes back to
the Greek philosophers—really got
rolling after the Protestant Reformation.
“ I t ’s the C hurch of England
that’s taught that the world is a
ball,” he argues. “George Washington, on the other hand, was a flatearther. He broke with England to
get away from those superstitions.”
If Johnson is right, the American
SCI/DI^ULY I960 61
FLAT EARTH— Continued
Revolution failed. No prominent
American politician is known to
have publicly endorsed the flatearth theory in the past two centuries. Nevertheless, Johnson contends
that this nearly happened right
after World W ar II, not for the U.S.
alone, but for the entire world.
Consider the United Nations:
“ Uncle Joe (Stalin), Churchill,
and Roosevelt laid the master plan
to bring in the New Age under the
United Nations,” Johnson discloses
with confidence. “The world ruling
power was to be right here in this
country. After the war, the world
would be declared flat and Roosevelt would be elected first president
of the world. When the UN Charter
was drafted in San Francisco, they
took the flat-earth map as their
symbol.”
Why declare the world flat? Johnson responds that a prophesied condition for world government (Isaiah
60:20) is that the “sun shall no
more go down.” This could be fulfilled by admitting that sunrise and
sunset are optical illusions. The UN
did adopt for its official seal a
world map identical with the one
on Jo h n s o n ’s office w all. B ut
Franklin Roosevelt died coincident
with the U N ’s birth, and the other
imminent events described by Johnson never came about.
W hat did happen, according to
conventional historians, was that
Russia and the U.S. began space
programs. After the Russians sent
up Sputnik in 1957, the space race
was on in earnest. The high point
came in 1969, when the U.S. landed
men on the moon.
That, according to Johnson, is
"Well, if you insist on getting a
second opinion— then it isn’t
sciatica."
nonsense, because the moon landings were faked by Hollywood studios. He even names the man who
wrote the scripts: the science-fiction
writer A rthur C. Clarke. But he acknowledges that the moon landings
were at least partly successful.
“Until then,” he says, “almost no
one seriously considered the world
a ball. The landings converted a few
of them, but many are coming back
now and getting off of it.”
Perhaps the Space Shuttle is intended to bolster the beliefs of these
backsliders. Whatever its purpose,
Johnson is convinced that it is not
intended to actually fly. Because it
was built and te s t^ almost in his
back yard, he knows many people
who worked on it. W hat they’ve
told him about some aspects of its
construction only reinforces his
convictions.
“They moved it across the field,”
he sneers, “and it almost fell apart.
All those little side pieces are on
with epoxy, and half fell off!”
The Shuttle had other problems
besides heat resistant tiles that
wouldn’t stick. For instance,' when
the testers tried to mount it on a
747 for its first piggy-back test
flight, it wouldn’t fit.
“Can you imagine that?” chortles
Johnson. “Millions of dollars they
spent, and it wouldn’t fit! They had
to call in a handyman to drill some
new holes to make the thing fit.
Then they took it up in the air—
and some more of it fell to pieces.”
If the Shuttle ever does orbit on
its own, it’s supposed to return to
Edwards Air Force Base. To Johnson, that’s appropriate enough.
“Do you know what they’re doing at Edw ards right now?” he
asks. “ ‘Buck Rogers in the 25th
Century’ is made right where they
claim they’re going to land the
Shuttle. Edwards is strictly a science-fiction base now.
“Buck is a much better science
program, considerably more authentic. In fact, I recommend that
the government get out of the space
business and turn the whole thing
over to ABC, CBS, and NBC. The
tv networks do a far superior job.
They could actually pay the government for rights, and it wouldn’t
cost the taxpayers a penny.”
Flat Earth Society members are
working actively to bring the Shuttle charade to an end. They hope to
force the government to let the public in on what the power elite has
known all along: the plane truth.
“ W hen the U nited States declares the e a rth is fla t,” says
Charles Johnson, “and we hope to
be instrumental in making it do so,
it will be the first nation in all re- .
corded history to be known as a
flat-earth nation.
“In the old days, people believed
the earth was flat, because it’s logical, but they didn’t have a picture
of the way it was, as we have today.
Our concept of the world is new.
“ M arjory and I are the avant
garde. W e’re way ahead of the
pack.” ■
Q u ic k Q u iz A n s w e r s
(See Page 8)
(1) The rule that bodies with low centers
of gravity are more stable applies only to
situations involving static equilibrium.
When balancing a stick on the tip of a finger, the finger is continuously moved so
as to keep it underneath the center of
gravity of the stick. This is because to assure balance the point of support must always be beneath the center of gravity.
However, when the stick is long, its moment of inertia (i.e., its resistance to turning) relative to the point of support is
large. As a result, the force of gravity
which is trying to turn the falling stick even
farther away from the vertical can only do
it very slowly, thus giving the person
enough time to shift the finger back underneath the center of gravity of the stick.
(2) The rate of filling (i.e., the amount of
rain that falls into the bucket per second)
will not change. Although the cross-sectional area of the rain falling into the bucket decreases, the velocity of the raindrops
not only changes direction but also increases in magnitude. In other words, the
rate at which the bucket fills depends only
on the vertical component of the velocity
of the raindrops, which is not altered by
the wind.
(3) Big sails are just as strong as small
sails. This contradicts the general principle that structures get weaker with increasing size. In this case the load (I.e.,
wind) is proportional to the area of the sail,
so it increases as the square of the linear
dimension rather than the cube as is usually the case when the load is in the form
of weight. Hence, the load per unit area is
independent of the area of the sail. For
the same reason, big umbrellas can resist
wind just as easily as small umbrellas.